---
title: "The POSO Ontology and its Relevancy for the OpenHPS Project"
date: 2022-10-17
layout: post.njk
eleventyExcludeFromCollections: true
thumbnail: "/posts/2022/10/iswc.jpg"
excerpt: "On Wednesday the 26th of October at 15:10 CEST, we will present the POSO ontology at the International Semantic Web Conference. In this blog post we discuss its relevancy to the OpenHPS framework."
---

> Imagine going to an airport as that has an indoor positioning system. You are a passenger and while you can use an application to navigate inside, you have no knowledge on how exactly the system works. You can guess how it works by reverse engineering what exactly the application does - is it scanning for Wi-Fi access points, is it scanning for Bluetooth beacons. But realisticly you can not know what happens. As a hybrid positioning framework we envision that information about a set-up of a positioning system can/should be open. This would mean that you can easily see which techniques and algorithms are used, where Bluetooth beacons are located and what their protocol is, what Wi-Fi fingerprints are stored in the database and most importantly - what information the system can gather. We feel like this transparancy would not only benefit users in a privacy-concious society, but also improve our way of living by having each system connected and working together. 

On **Wednesday the 26th of October at 15:10-16:10 CEST** [Maxim Van de Wynckel](https://wise.vub.ac.be/maxim-van-de-wynckel) will present the paper [*POSO: A Generic Positioning System Ontology*](/publications/2022/iswc2022) at [The 21st International Semantic Web Conference](https://iswc2022.semanticweb.org/). POSO is a semantic ontology that allows you to describe positioning systems and the data they produce.

We designed POSO to be generic, so it can be used to describe an outdoor positioning system, indoor, under water or maybe even something more abstract like a positioning system for the *metaverse*.

<h3>The Future of Positioning</h3>
For all positioning systems, the data is just as important as the technologies that are used to obtain them. In academic projects, once a positioning system fullfilled its purpose - it usually disappears to make way for the next experiment. On the other hand, indoor positioning systems that are in-use today often require a proprietary application to work. Other researchers or developers can often not access the set-up of the system or the data they produce.

We envision that future positioning systems will be able to work together. Not just on a low sensor level, but on a high level as well. Our first step in this vision was with [IPIN 2022](/publications/2022/ipin2022) where we showed how the [Solid project](https://solidproject.org/) could be used to create interoperable positioning systems and applications. With POSO we expanded on this work in progress paper with a large vocabulary that could be used by anyone in order to describe a complete system.

<h3>The Future of OpenHPS</h3>
We recently converted our RDF module to use the POSO ontology. It is the first step to allow OpenHPS to store data in RDF format.
It is designed to be <i>developer friendly</i> requiring limited knowledge on RDF or the querying that is involved.

*<b>Written by</b> Maxim Van de Wynckel, PhD Candidate*