---
title: "Stream location data to Solid"
date: 2025-02-14
layout: post.njk
thumbnail: "/posts/2024/06/protobuf-module-thumb.png"
image: "/posts/2024/06/protobuf-module.png"
excerpt: ""
eleventyExcludeFromCollections: true
---
In 2022, we [presented](/posts/2022/ipin2022/) a prototype of storing output of a positioning system in Solid. While the demonstration served its purpose, its implementation was not ideal for a real-world scenario. First of all, the data was stored in a single file, which is not scalable. Secondly, the implementation broke the design principles in OpenHPS which aims to create a *flow of information* from source to sink. 

Over the years, we have been finetuning the OpenHPS framework to support a more scalable and robust way of storing location data in Solid. In this interactive blog post, we will demonstrate how to stream location data directly to Solid using OpenHPS. The main concepts we will discuss in this blog post are:
- [`SolidPropertyService`](https://openhps.org/docs/solid/classes/solidpropertyservice): A service that allows you to create `properties` and store the observations of those properties in Solid. Other than our previous implementation, we structure the data over multiple containers, which allows for a more scalable solution. 
- [`SolidPropertySink`](https://openhps.org/docs/solid/classes/solidpropertysink): In conjunction with the `SolidPropertyService`, the `SolidPropertySink` allows you to stream location data to Solid by using this sink node within your positioning system model.
- [`SolidPropertySource`](): In conjunction with the `SolidPropertyService`, this source node allows you to stream location data from Solid.

Our property service is modified to store data in Linked Data Event Streams (LDES) over multiple LDP containers similar to the paper [*Writing Linked Data Event Streams in LDP Basic Containers*](https://woutslabbinck.github.io/LDESinLDP/). However, we still make use of the POSO ontology, and observable properties linked from the WebID.

Let's get started by using some code examples!

> NOTE: This blog post is interactive. You can test the code examples directly in your browser (from step 2 on). Hovering over the code examples will show you JSDoc documentation. Feel free to *view the source* of this page to see the full code.

## Getting started
It is as simple as three steps. In the first step we will create a positioning system model. In the second step we will authenticate the user with the Solid provider. Finally, in the third step we will start the positioning system by pulling fake location data. The property service and sink node will handle the structuring and storing of the location data in Solid.

### Step 1: Create a positioning system model
For the scope of this example, our processing network will be simple. We will create a model that reads location data from a source, and pushes it to a sink. We add two services to the model: a `SolidPropertyService` and a [`SolidClientService`](https://openhps.org/docs/solid/classes/solidclientservice). The Solid client service provides the basic API and authentication for interfacing with a Solid provider and internally keeping track of multiple sessions. The property service handles the creation of properties and the storage of observations in Solid.

Finally, we add a `SolidPropertySink` to the model. This sink node will transform data frames to observations and store them in the Pod of a user.

<!-- Step 1 -->
<script type="module">
import { ModelBuilder, GeographicalPosition, DataObject, DataFrame, CallbackSourceNode } from '/scripts/vendor/openhps/openhps-core.es.min.js';
import '/scripts/vendor/openhps/openhps-rdf.all.es.min.js';
import { SolidPropertyService, SolidClientService } from '/scripts/vendor/openhps/openhps-solid.es.min.js';

// Fake location data
let idx = 0;
const locationData = [
    { latitude: 50.8503, longitude: 4.3517, timestamp: new Date('2025-02-14T10:00:00Z') },
    { latitude: 50.8504, longitude: 4.3520, timestamp: new Date('2025-02-14T10:05:00Z') },
    { latitude: 50.8505, longitude: 4.3525, timestamp: new Date('2025-02-14T10:10:00Z') }
];

ModelBuilder.create()
    .addService(new SolidClientService({
        autoLogin: false
    }))
    .from(new CallbackSourceNode(() => {
        // Return fake location data
        if (idx >= locationData.length) {
            return undefined;
        }
        const maxim = new DataObject("mvdewync");
        maxim.setPosition(new GeographicalPosition(locationData[idx].latitude, locationData[idx].longitude));
        return new DataFrame(maxim);
    }))
    .via(/* Add your processing nodes here */)
    .to()
    .build().then(model => {
        /* Do something */
        window.positioningModel = model;
    });
</script>

```ts twoslash
import { ModelBuilder, GeographicalPosition, DataObject, DataFrame, CallbackSourceNode } from '@openhps/core';
import '@openhps/rdf';
import { SolidPropertyService, SolidClientService, SolidPropertySink } from '@openhps/solid';

// Fake location data
let idx = 0;
const locationData = [
    { latitude: 50.8503, longitude: 4.3517, timestamp: new Date('2025-02-14T10:00:00Z') },
    { latitude: 50.8504, longitude: 4.3520, timestamp: new Date('2025-02-14T10:05:00Z') },
    { latitude: 50.8505, longitude: 4.3525, timestamp: new Date('2025-02-14T10:10:00Z') }
];

ModelBuilder.create()
    .addService(new SolidClientService({
        autoLogin: false
    }))
    .from(new CallbackSourceNode(() => {
        // Return fake location data
        if (idx >= locationData.length) {
            return undefined;
        }
        const maxim = new DataObject("mvdewync");
        maxim.setPosition(new GeographicalPosition(locationData[idx].latitude, locationData[idx].longitude));
        return new DataFrame(maxim);
    }))
    .via(/* Add your processing nodes here */)
    .to()
    .build().then(model => {
        /* Do something */
        (window as any).positioningModel = model;
    });
```

### Step 2: Authenticate the user
Once you have created the model, you need to authenticate the user. This can be done by interacting with the Solid service. The Solid service will redirect the user to the Solid provider to authenticate the user.


```ts twoslash
function authenticate() {
    // Authenticate the user
    
}
```

> NOTE: By clicking the button, you agree to authenticate with the Solid provider and to store 'fake' location data in your Solid Pod.

<button class="btn" onclick="authenticate()">Authenticate</button>

### Step 3: Start the positioning system
Once the user is authenticated, you can start the positioning system.

<button class="btn" onclick="start()">Start</button>
